[MUSIC]
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna leave
recursion behind for a little bit,
in other words don't use recursion until
I tell you we're gonna use recursion.
These are all going to
be done using loops, but
recursion is a building block that
we need to have in our abilities
to be able to do some of
these other problems.
So a lot of algorithms
come down to sorting.
That's because sorting numbers is a very
useful thing in computer science, and
there's many ways to skin
a cat in this particular case.
First one we're gonna talk
about is bubble sort.
Bubble sort is not useful.
[LAUGH] As in you are not ever going
to use bubble sort in production code.
It's a very useful learning tool,
though, because it very well
applies to the way that we as humans think
about sorting numbers in our head, right?
The basic gist of bubble store is I
have a, let's see, diagram that out.
>> Brian Holt: And pen, black, here we go.
All right, so
if I have numbers like 5, that's good.
>> Speaker 2: Hey, Brian?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Before we get too far
into this, we still have
a question on the last exercise.
>> Brian Holt: Sure.
>> Speaker 2: Damien is asking,
he's wondering if n less
than two return n works?
He says that all tests pass.
>> Brian Holt: n less than two,
yeah, that totally works.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, it's maybe a slightly
less efficient but
you have one additional call, right?
So maybe if your call stack's at 255 and
it pushed to 256 and
you have a stack overflow
it might be a problem, but
if that makes more sense to you,
I think that's totally fine.
The reason probably why I would err
on the side of using one is it's very
explicit, right?
It's very easy for someone to come later
who's like, it just returns one, right?
Whereas they have to reason about it,
it's okay, well if it's less than two then
it's just going to return one, right?
They have to reason about that.
Not that that's hard but that works for
you, then more power to you.
>> Brian Holt: Good question, okay,
so let's talk about bubble sort here.
So if we have a list of 5, 7, 6, okay?
Bubble sort is where we're gonna
compare two numbers at a time and
then we're going to swap them
if they're out of order.
Let's actually do this so
4 is in here as well.
Okay, so we're gonna have an outer loop
that's going to go around the numbers and
an inner loop that's going to
compare those numbers, right?
So the outer loop is going to go through,
I explained that incorrectly.
So the outer loop continues running
as long as there are numbers swapped
in the previous iteration, right?
So the outer loop is always
going to run at least once.
The inner loop is going to go through and
swap numbers if they're out of order,
okay?
So 5 and 7, in order, no swap.
7 and 6, out of order, so
we're going to swap them.
So it's just 5 and
then we're gonna swap to 6 and 7, right?
And then at this point 7 and
4 are out of order.
So we're going to swap those as well.
So it's going to be 4, 7, right?.
And at the end of our first iteration
it's gonna be 5, 6, 4, 7, right?
Now something was swapped in
the previous iteration the so
we're going to do that again.
So I'm gonna clear this and do that again.
>> Brian Holt: So I think it was 5, 6,
4, 7 thank you, okay?
So we’re gonna run the same algorithm,
5 and 6 still in order those get put down.
6 and 4, those are out of orders
o we're gonna swap those.
5 or 4, 6, and that's in order so
that's going to be,
something was swapped in
the previous iteration.
So in this particular case we're
going to do 4, 5, 6, 7, right,
cuz those ones are all still in order.
Now, it's in order right now, right?
We know that looking at it, however,
the computer doesn't know that yet, right?
So something swapped in
the previous iteration so
it's going to go through again.
And because nothing's gonna swap in that
last iteration, it's [SOUND] okay, done.
And then bubble sort's finished.
So, to recap you have an outer loop.
It's going to be a while
loop that runs once, right?
Runs at least once,
which that's a do-while loop, right?
Most of us don't use do loops
very much in JavaScript.
I can't actually remember a time if
I've professionally used to do loop,
but we're gonna use it here.
You can model that with
a while loop as well, but
this is one of the only times you get to
use a do loop so you might as well do it.
Okay, so you're going to do-while loop
where the outer loop is going to go
through while something has been swapped,
right?
And then you have the inner loop that's
going to go through and say, is x and
x, or n, n and
n plus one are they are out of order?
Okay, swapped, are they not?
Leave it, and then it just moves on and
keep swapping things until
they come back in order.
You see here this diagram kind of shows
you what that looks like over time.
So what's the Big O on this?
Well we have an outer do-while loop and
we have an inner for loop, right?
So what does that end up being?
n squared, right, cuz we have
an inner loop and an outer loop.
And this is a, again,
wildly inefficient algorithm but
hopefully now you've conceptualized
exactly how it works.
So it is a good teaching tool.